SOUTH ASIA, 1857–1947: COLONIALISM AND GLOBALIZATION1 South Asia, 1857–1947 From the end of the eighteenth century, South Asia began to experience two overlapping processes of change that transformed patterns of production and consumption in the region. These were the rise of colonial rule, and the integration of the region in the emerging world markets for commodities, capital and labour; ‘globalization’ for short.2 By 1947, the larger nations of South Asia presented a paradoxical mix of acute rural poverty and robust industrialization. The book describes the changes in the structure of the economy initiated by this dual process, and asks how we should explain the paradox of extraordinary achievements amidst poverty and stagnation. Answers to the question can contribute to a larger project in world history. Economic historians are interested in finding out why the world became more unequal in the two centuries after the Industrial Revolution began in Western Europe. South Asia, which contains a large part of the world’s population, is a necessary test for models that seek to explain world inequality. Is the explanation of persistent poverty to be found in colonial rule, in globalization, or endogenous obstacles such as geographical constraints or social institutions? And if these variables were responsible for poverty, how do we account for the positive achievements? Does a world region so difficult to categorize as ‘success’ or ‘failure’ fit any general model at all? The main interest of the book is with a time span when colonialism and globalization were active in the region. This is the reason why the major part of the text is preoccupied with a period that begins from 1857, when direct rule of the Crown over what had been territories acquired by the East India Company was formally established, and ends in 1947, when the nations of South Asia saw the end of British rule in the region. The post-colonial regimes radically recast external economic relations, increased the size of the state, and 2 economic history of india enhanced state control over the process of economic development. Yet, 1947 was not the ‘end of history’ by any means. This work will suggest that persistent poverty in post-colonial India owed in part to the obstacles that the colonial pattern of growth had neglected or failed to remove, and that some of the positive achievements of the post-colonial times can only be understood with reference to the colonial foundations. I return to the link between the past and the present in the last section of this chapter, and in the concluding chapter (Chapter 12). Colonialism and Globalization The first process, transition to colonialism, was under way for almost a century, 1757–1856. During this period the English East India Company annexed the Indian territories that came to constitute British India. After the Battle of Plassey or Palashi in 1757, and especially after the grant by the Mughal Emperor of the taxation rights of Bengal to the Company in 1765, the Company established a power-sharing arrangement with the Nawab, or the Mughal governor, of Bengal. The partnership was an unequal one, and soon tilted towards absolute control by the Company over the administration of Bengal. In 1799, the Company defeated its principal southern rival, Mysore, and in 1803–4 and 1817–18, overcame its major adversary in the north and the west, the Marathas. In 1856, after Awadh was annexed, the British territorial campaign came to a stop (the major political units of colonial India are shown in Map 1.1). At the end of the mutiny that took place in 1857, India became a colony of the Crown. About 60 per cent of the land area in the present India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh belonged then to British India (Table 1.1). Outside British India, there were more than 500 princely states in South Asia, nominally independent, but militarily dependent on the British. They had by then come to terms with British hegemony, in a one-sided relationship the like of which no previous imperial power in the region could claim to have enjoyed (see also Figure 1.1). This relationship is sometimes called ‘indirect rule’, though it was qualitatively quite different from the indirect rule that the European colonists developed later in Africa. The second process, integration of the region with the world financial and commercial system, had been active from the eighteenth century, but its significance earlier had been greater in some littoral regions and weaker in the interior. The ratio of trade to domestic product increased from possibly 1–2 per cent in 1800 to a little less than 10 per cent in the 1860s and to 20 per cent by 1914. International flows of income, capital, and labour were larger in the colonial period than before or after. Government transactions became closely connected with the balance of payments. By 1914, many regions of the world which were rich in natural resources supplied food and raw material to industrializing Europe. Peasants and merchants in India seized these new opportunities. The new regime of trade signified a deeper engagement of the domestic economy with the world market. The rise of British rule was not just a political change. The new rulers did not arise from the established ruling classes. They were strangers. The British were a mercantile population turning industrial by the end of the eighteenth century, whereas India was overwhelmingly agricultural. Being outsiders and merchants, the new regime could initiate policies and follow principles of governance that upset the established (agrarian) order as never before. Like any other Indian regime in introduction 3 Indus Indus Yamuna Ganges Ghaghara Ganges Narmada Godavari Krishna Coleroon Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Indian Ocean Gulf of Mannar Palk Strait Mouths of the Ganges KASHMIR P U N J A B S I N D BALUCHISTAN R A J P U T A N A UNITED PROVINCES B E N G A L ORISSA BERAR BOMBAY HYDERABAD MYSORE MADRAS P U N J A B BIHAR CENTRAL P ROVINCES GOA (Portuguese) C E N T R A L I N D I A AFGHANISTAN T I B E T BURMA NEPAL PERSIA BHUTAN CEYLON Lahore Delhi Karachi Cochin Simla Calcutta Bombay Hyderabad Madras Pondicherry (French) 75˚ 90˚ 15˚ 30˚ 75˚ 90˚ 30˚ 15˚ 0 0 200 200 400 Kilometers 400 Miles Indian States Indian Provinces Map 1.1 India the past the new rule was dependent on the taxation of landed wealth. However, it was also committed to protecting trade and private investment in the region, which was beginning to play a major supporting role in Britain’s engagement with the world economy. India was crucial to Britain and the British Empire as a market for its manufactures, chiefly textiles, machinery and metals, and as a source of food, migrant labour, industrial raw materials, and manufactured goods intensive in labour and natural resources. Through commodity and factor market transactions, close ties developed between India and Britain, and via Britain, between India and the rest of the world. Colonialism strengthened globalization. Institutions and infrastructure necessary for a market economy to smoothly function were set up, including uniform weights and measures, contract law, unified currency, the 4 economic history of india railways, the telegraph, and a powerful state committed to defending private property rights. Export opportunities, well-defined property rights, and the new infrastructure encouraged peasant production for the market in place of production for consumption or local exchange. In turn, this commercialization led to a limited form of peasant prosperity and more efficient agriculture in several regions. The profits made in these commodity trades were reinvested by some business communities in urban construction and the erection of modern factories. Dramatic as these changes were, they did not produce dramatic rates of improvement in average standards of living. In the late nineteenth century, total and average incomes grew at rates that did not compare badly with the rest of the world. However, growth rates in the interwar period slowed. Japan is a country with which nineteenth century India tends to be frequently compared for Japan and India had similar standards of living till about 1850. Given its rate of growth, colonial India would have needed several centuries to double its standard of living, a feat Japan seemed to achieve in a few decades. The paradox here is best expressed in the words of Raymond Goldsmith: If a percipient and knowledgeable economist, for example, John Stuart Mill or Karl Marx, had been asked in 1870 whether a century later India or Japan would be more advanced economically and financially and thus closer to the levels of Western Europe and North America, it is possible, and indeed likely, that he would have named India. To justify his choice, he might have pointed to the facts that India, as a result of its connection with Great Britain, possessed a unified currency and the rudiments of Western-type banking system, as well as easy access to the British capital market and British industrial and financial technology, then the most advanced available. Japan, on the other hand, was just emerging from a decaying feudal system; its modern sector was negligible; its currency was in chaos; and it lacked modern financial institutions. Neither Mill nor Marx would ever have envisaged the abysmal difference that marks the observed economic and financial development of the two countries.3 Goldsmith overstated the paradox. The modernization process that Marx foresaw in British India was not an illusion. On the eve of World War I, India, along with Japan and imperial Russia, was one of the world’s most successful examples of late industrialization. The cotton textile industry in Bombay Table 1.1 Major Provinces in 1881, with Approximate Dates of Annexation British Territories Dates of Annexation of Major Constituents Area in ‘000 square miles Bengal, Bihar, Orissa 1757–65 150 Madras 1765 (Carnatic), 1766 (Northern Circars), 1792–9 (Dindigul, Malabar, Canara), 1801 (Ceded districts) 139 Bombay and Sind 1803–18 (Maratha territories), 1848 (Satara), 1843 (Sind) 124 Punjab 1849 107 Central Provinces and Berar 1803–18 (Maratha territories), 1853 (Berar) 101 North-west Provinces and Oudh 1775 (Benares), 1853 ( Jhansi), 1856 (Awadh) 106 Total British India 868 (58%) Indian States Remaining 509 (42%) Sources: Compiled from data in India, Statistical Abstract relating to British India from 1876/7 to 1885/6, London: HMSO, 1887; and Michael Fisher, The Politics of British Annexation of India 1757–1857, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1993. introduction 5 was soon to overtake Lancashire in the Indian market. The jute textile industry in Calcutta monopolized the world’s demand for packaging material in commodity trade. India had some of the developing world’s largest banks, universities, technical schools, printing industries, and railway and telegraph systems. The real paradox was that a century of commercial agriculture and urban growth had left no more than a dent in rural poverty in India. On several occasions, sudden failures of rain gave rise to dreadful famines in the nineteenth century. Epidemic diseases recurred with devastating consequences. Levels of literacy were among the lowest in the world. Women were invisible in livelihoods that provided a reasonable wage. How then do we read colonial India? Was it a case of economic growth, or stagnation and crisis? The question can be approached in a global history frame, using India as an illustration of theories about growth and inequality on a world scale. In order to do so, we need to consider how theories of economic change in the long run can be used to formulate questions about colonial India or to answer them. THEORIES OF ECONOMIC HISTORY As a study of the origins of economic growth, economic history allows us to investigate those drivers of long-term growth that usually remain exogenous to formal theoretical models. For example, cultural make-up could matter to technological innovation, but the role of culture is usually left out of formal economic theory. Other examples of relevant variables are institutions, demography, Figure 1.1 The Ruling Princes of India. This crowded group appearing on an early twentieth century postcard represents a random selection of the princely rulers whose collective support helped the raj rule in peace. The impressive sartorial display in the picture was one of the many ways adopted to cover up the lack of real power. The illusion of power was carefully maintained by the raj. Courtesy: Images of Asia. 6 economic history of india geography and environment, and political systems such as colonialism, market formation or commercialization, and state formation. Some of these variables change sufficiently slowly to be treated as exogenous. Some others simply cannot be handled adequately by available theoretical models. Four large variables that occupy a great part of the economic history discourse deserve particular attention. These are market formation, institutions, politics, and resources. Market Formation4 Modern attempts to supply general answers to the question of what causes economic growth began with Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations (1776). The key to economic growth was the productivity of labour. Only by increasing the quantity that each individual was able to produce could the average consumption or income increase. Productivity would increase if each individual concentrated on performing one task rather than dividing up energy and resources to doing too many (that is, if individuals practised division of labour), and concentrated on those tasks which they were best able to do (that is, if they specialized). Smith attributed technological change to the principle that ‘men are much more likely to discover easier and readier methods’ when they directed their attention to doing one task. What drove the process was market exchange. Individuals would produce more than their own needs only when there was a prospect of selling the surplus. The more markets expanded, the more surplus would be produced, the more efficient and more specialized one would get, and the more dependent one would become on the market. Further on in his book, Smith also added that markets, to perform these roles to the fullest, must not be restrained. That is, markets must be competitive. Otherwise they would tend to push up costs of production. Smith inspired several attempts to link growth with markets. In 1969, John Hicks developed a general view of European history in terms of market formation. Before Hicks, Hla Myint had offered a Smithian interpretation of the economic history of the tropical world. In the nineteenth century, the prospect of exporting food and raw materials to industrializing Europe led regions in Asia and Africa to utilize their idle resources, chiefly land and labour, more intensively. Markets, by bringing idle resources into usage, increased efficiency. The link between markets and resource endowments was further developed in the classical and neo-classical theories of trade. The Heckscher–Ohlin theory predicts trade to take place because of international differences in costs of production, in turn due to differences in the supply of production factors. Those goods that require relatively large quantities of the abundant and cheaper factor sell relatively low-priced in the world market. Consistent with this principle, in the nineteenth century the land-abundant New World territories in the Americas exported land-intensive products such as grain, cattle, or timber, and the land-scarce labour-abundant Europe exported labourintensive cotton textiles and people. In this scenario, factor prices should converge in the long run. Low-wage economies should experience a rise in wage, and high-wage economies experience a fall in wage. Trade should lead to a convergence, or weakening of inequalities between persons and nations. Productive resources like capital should migrate to capital-poor regions seeking higher returns and in turn raising labour productivity introduction 7 in the latter. Growth driven by the quality of human capital, freer flow of knowledge, and falling cost of acquisition of advanced techniques should again induce convergence.5 These predictions are borne out in the case of regions on both sides of the north Atlantic that grew richer and more equal by trading between themselves.6 But the whole world did not experience convergence. In fact, world inequality increased between 1820 and 1914, when something like a world economy emerged. If the factor price convergence worked at all, it worked for a limited set of countries. Why did it fail to work for the world as a whole? There are many critiques of Smithian growth. One of these tends to be pessimistic about the growth potentials of primary goods exports, which the tropical world came to rely on. In the course of international specialization, these regions suffer a destruction of their handicrafts, or deindustrialization. But specializing as a peasant exporter could hardly offer the promise of sustainable growth, owing to the operation of diminishing returns to land. Modern industry, on the other hand, offered scope for increasing returns to scale. International trade and specialization was therefore capable of producing international inequality.7 Another link between trade and inequality is suggested in the idea that agriculture is subject to diminishing consumption demand (Engel’s law) and terms-of-trade shocks.8 These pessimistic predictions somewhat underestimate the fact that parts of the tropical and temperate zones in fact became richer by specializing in primary products processing rather than by industrializing. Canada, Australia, New Zealand, or South Africa, despite the latter’s appalling record of domestic inequality, should count as examples that do not fit easily with the industrialize-orimpoverish version of world history.9 Can this difference be explained with reference to the quality of institutions? Institutions10 The new institutional approach to world economic history dispenses with one of the assumptions of neo-classical theory, that the world we live in has a stable underlying structure. The world is full of uncertainty, and economic agents try to deal with uncertainty by devising rules. Important forms of uncertainty occur in the sphere of property and contract. A good crop represents potential profits, but if property rights on the land are poorly defined and enforced, the producer may not enjoy those gains, and not have an incentive to produce a good crop. Market exchange between parties who do not know each other well enough increases the risk of fraud and breach of contract. Uncertainties of these kinds make transactions potentially costly, and the transaction costs discourage market exchange. Institutions, together with the means to enforce rules, create an incentive structure, that is, encourage individuals to take certain actions in preference to others. Growthbegetting rules reduce uncertainty, transaction costs, and encourage market exchange. Bad rules do the opposite. In a society where there are legal safeguards against fraud and these are enforced properly, institutions encourage more stable and mutually profitable economic exchange. How does a society arrive at any institution at all, good or bad? One solution is the state. ‘It is the polity that defines and enforces the formal economic rules of the game’.11 On this point the institutional approach encounters a problem. Polities that 8 economic history of india are strong enough to enforce the rules of the game are also strong enough to bend the rules in favour of factions or particular players. A tentative answer to the problem is represented in the idea of ‘credible commitment’, meaning sufficient competition and fragmentation in political power to restrain the powerful rulers from bending the rules. In one approach within institutional economic history, the crucial difference between the rich and the poor nations can be found in the quality of the legal system, meaning fairness of law and enforcement by the state. Another approach to the origins of good rules looks at the society rather than the state; in particular, considers profit-oriented collectives such as guilds and corporations, which devise their own command and control mechanisms. One author concludes that the formation of ‘interest-based, self-governed, non-kin-based organizations’ characterized the late medieval commercial flourish in Europe, whereas in other commercial societies groups were formed from ties of blood or marriage; and that interest-based corporations contributed to Europe’s precocious advances in science and technology.12 Historically, the state-made rules and the collective-made rules represented different ways of arriving at the most important modern embodiment of economic institutions, namely property and contract laws. The institutionist paradigm has been mainly tested and debated in the context of the rise of the modern West. Applied research following this approach, and looking at the history of the non-West is still a developing field. Recent scholarship has advanced some tentative propositions, nevertheless. One proposition is that world inequality derived from the policies of the European colonizers with respect to taking the good European institutions with them into the colonies. A second position considers that the economic outcome of legal regimes sharing a Western root differed according to the system of laws exported from the European colonist countries to the conquered and colonized world. A cluster of papers on the Americas shows how the presence of a relatively egalitarian property right regime in North America and ethnicitybiased property rights in Spanish America, contributed to divergent growth outcomes.13 The institutional approach tempers market optimism by making gains from exchange contingent on the quality of institutions. In Marxist thought, the very act of market exchange involves gain for some and deprivation for others. The key to inequality via market exchange is unequal asset holding and the unequal political power that goes with it. Class and Political Power Karl Marx distinguished the use value of commodities and their market value, and defined capitalism as an economic system driven by the desire to produce goods with greater market value. Capital consists of commodities used to create other commodities with higher market value than contained in the inputs. The market value of labour (wage) is less than the value it produces. This difference (surplus value) the owners of capital extract and accumulate. Many past societies witnessed appropriation of surplus. In capitalism the appropriation happens in the market by owners of money and machinery. ‘Class’ is defined by the ownership of assets. Capitalists own money and machinery, and labourers own labour power. The cycle of extraction of surplus value intensifies class struggle, which in turn threatens to undermine the system. In Marx’s reading of European economic history, capitalists extended their power by introduction 9 the use of coercive means of several types. ‘In actual history,’ he wrote, ‘it is a notorious fact that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, in short, force, play the greatest part [in accumulation of capital].’14 Capitalists extended control of common lands from the fifteenth to the eighteenth century, uprooting peasants who crowded the towns as an industrial proletariat. They plundered gold and silver of the New World, and plundered newly colonized lands in Asia and Africa to build up reserves of capital. Curiously, Marx displayed quite hopeful sentiment about the whole process. He believed that colonization and capitalism would help ‘Asiatic’ societies shake off their own tradition of despotic rules and economic stagnation. In the 1970s, a Marx-inspired theory of European imperialism proposed that nineteenth century empires were indeed driven by capitalistic motives (see Box 1.1) and that the exploitations that it sustained impoverished and underdeveloped the present-day developing world. These schools were neo-Marxist in retaining an emphasis on surplus transfer and class relations, but did not follow Marx’s own assessment of the non- Western world as pre-capitalistic and stagnant. If the whole world is seen to be divided into two halves, one endowed with capital and the other with labour resources, world inequality can be explained by characterizing the world production system as a capitalistic mechanism effecting transfer of surplus. A variety of schools of thought—the Latin American dependency, the theory of ‘unequal exchange’, and André Gunder Frank’s account of the ‘development of underdevelopment’— explained the persistence of, and the origins of underdevelopment in terms of transfer of surplus, and emphasized colonialism as a vehicle for doing so, even erected for that very purpose.15 Connecting underdevelopment with colonialism has not gone unchallenged. Criticizing the Marxist theories of imperialism, the maverick Marxist, Bill Warren, pointed out that colonial rule had in fact produced economic growth in many regions of the colonized world, much as Marx had predicted it would. Warren concluded that underdevelopment ‘originate[d] ….. not in ... imperialist-Third World relationships, but ... from the internal contradictions of the Third World itself ’. He did not elaborate on these ‘contradictions’.16 Warren possibly went too far. The problem with the neo-Marxist approach (as well as the institutional approach) is not that it underestimates growth in the colonial world, but that it fails to account for differences within the developing world. Colonial Africa grew faster than colonial India. Did colonialism succeed in producing economic growth in Africa and fail to do so in India? Post-colonial Africa, on the other hand, suffered massive economic collapse, civil strife, and state failure, whereas South Asia experienced greater political and economic stability. Did colonialism succeed in laying the foundations for social and economic stability in South Asia, while creating potentials for instability in Africa? It would be senseless to answer both questions with a positive. We need an economic history that can account for contrasts such as these. Neither the neo- Marxists nor the institutionists supply an account of world inequality that is sufficiently sensitive to these differences. One notion that the neo-Marxist writers tried to displace was that the non-Western world had been trapped in a pre-capitalist culture. The modernization approach influenced by these writings held that economic growth required traits that made people more rational, more calculative of gains and costs, more frugal, and more innovative.17 10 economic history of india By implication, the third world was poor because it was too traditional (see also Box 1.2). The neo-Marxist development schools criticized the modernization approach by suggesting that being poor did not mean being pre-capitalist or pre-modern. Colonial domination and the rise of the West had made the non-West poorer. Both modernization and its neo-Marxist critics found the phenomenon of emerging economies in the 1980s and the 1990s difficult to explain with their models. More than any intellectual criticism, economic growth in the newly industrializing economies in East Asia damaged the modernization theory, for East Asia was, in some accounts, culturally distinct from the West. But it also damaged the case argued by the neo-Marxists, for the latter refused to acknowledge the possibility of economic growth in the poorer world, which would be driven by trading with the richer world and would not need a political revolution to shake off the dominance of the richer world. What did survive the turmoil was a vision of world history in the very long run that joined together a Smithian accent upon markets with a Marxian interest in politics. One example of a particularly successful neo-Marxist theory of history is Immanuel Wallerstein’s world systems analysis. This approach begins from the premise that the nation and the nationstate cannot be a useful unit of analysis of economic history, for nation is a new idea whereas the economy is a much older thing.18 Upon that premise, Wallerstein developed his vision of the world economy in the last 500 years as a growing network of regions integrated through the market; the regions being interdependent for food, material, and security; and characterized by polities trying to compete for control over the whole network. The idea has been influential as an approach to global history. And yet, the explanation of world inequality that derives from Wallerstein’s framework consists of little more than the Marxist idea of an international transfer of surplus maintained by European colonialism. All of these approaches to world history implicitly assume that all regions of the world initially shared similar conditions and had equal chances of economic growth but for differential access to trade, institutions, and political resources. This assumption, of course, is not a valid one to make. For geographical conditions vary greatly. Resource Endowments Land and water resources in temperate Europe and Saharan Africa are not comparable in quality. If agriculture depends on low-quality land that does not yield a surplus over subsistence, where will the tax resources necessary to build a strong state able to design and enforce good institutions come from, and what surplus will the capitalists extract and accumulate?19 Even societies dependent on fertile land and plentiful water can run out of the resources needed to sustain economic growth if population grows too rapidly. Clearly, it is necessary to theorize the role of resource endowments in economic growth. The classical view on how population matters is often called ‘Malthusian’, after the classical English economist, Thomas Malthus. The term ‘Malthusian’ today is used in different senses. Three different meanings can be distinguished. One of these emphasizes the welfare consequences of population growth, the second emphasizes the economic growth consequences, and the third the distributional consequences. The welfare story is based on two propositions: more food production, introduction 11 Box 1.1 Colonialism: The Origins Tropical and equatorial Asia and Africa contained many colonies of European nations about 1900. Although the term ‘empire’ is often used in these cases, these modern empires were different from pre-modern ones. Whereas the relationship between the core region and the periphery in pre-modern empires was based on taxes and tributes, in the modern empires the relationship was capitalistic, that is, based on an imperative to protect business interests. The colonies were diverse entities. The diversity owed to local conditions as well as to the history of colonization. British India started in the mid-eighteenth century from the intrigues of the English East India Company negotiating trade licenses with the ruler of Bengal. By contrast, much of interior Africa was colonized by the European states late in the nineteenth century, even though European slave traders had long been familiar with the African littoral. Colonies were governed differently too. British India was ruled by Britain directly, whereas in Africa, governance was often delegated to local chiefs and private companies. The length and directness of rule, and the legacy of Mughal bureaucratic culture that the British inherited, saw more political continuity and stability in India. In Africa, there was greater rupture between the traditional and the modern states, unleashing much violence. Where did modern empires spring from? One theory attributes it to mature capitalism. In one definition, mature capitalism meant too much capital chasing too few profitable investments at home; in another, it meant unsold goods seeking markets; and in a third, it meant the authority of monopoly firms who had the capacity to sponsor colonization. The English economist J.A. Hobson stressed the investment motive for territorial expansion. The Austrian-born German Marxist intellectual Rudolf Hilferding believed that imperialism was funded by bankers. The Polish–German activist and writer Rosa Luxemburg stressed the consumption motive. The American sociologist James O’Connor and the British economist Tom Kemp discussed the role of politically connected multinationals. Did colonialism derive from the profit motive? Evidence of an association between profitability and colonization is weak. Capital export from the West to the non-West was small in extent outside of railways and government bonds. Expansion was often driven by a desire to access particular natural resources. While there were instances (like Congo under the Belgian king Leopold II) where such resources were extracted with force, there were also colonies that exported little of value, consumed little European goods, and had few European businesses, the French Saharan territories for example. Even when the gains were large in absolute terms, questions remain on whether relative rates of return from colonial investment were higher than alternative uses of capital, and how far the gains explained Europe’s accumulation and growth. The difficulty of explaining colonialism with profitability leads to other theories. Some of these explanations, developed with reference to the British Empire, stress global political rivalries ( J. Gallagher and R. Robinson), or the interests of the financial interests of London, the gentlemanly capitalists who were keen to maintain a worldwide flow of funds (P. Cain and A.G. Hopkins). Readings: A. Brewer, Marxist Theories of Imperialism, London: Routledge, 1980; P.J. Cain and A.G. Hopkins, ‘Gentlemanly Capitalism and British Expansion Overseas’, Economic History Review (EHR), 39(4), 1986, pp. 501–25, and 40(1), 1987, pp. 1–26. Patrick K. O’Brien, ‘The Costs and Benefits of British Imperialism 1846–1914’, Past and Present, 120, 1988, pp. 163–200; Lance E. Davis and R.A. Huttenback, ‘The Political Economy of British Imperialism: Measures of Benefits and Support’, Journal of Economic History (JEH), 42(1), 1982, pp. 119–30. 12 economic history of india or more economic growth in an agricultural society, will induce more births; and if population grows too fast in relation to food, famines and epidemics will become more likely. The economic side of the story states that adding more people to work on the land will lead to a diminishing return to labour, especially if continuous agricultural expansion begins to degrade land. The distributional side of the story states that population growth, by making food relatively scarcer, can reduce the real wages of workers. These three propositions together paint a prospect of a fall in average well-being that looms over any densely populated agrarian economy, which South Asia has been for much of the time covered in this book. How have these propositions stood up to evidence? Food availability as a theory of population growth is too simplistic. Amartya Sen has shown that food availability as a theory of famine is not too successful either.20 Ester Boserup proposed that steps to counter diminishing returns by means of land-saving innovation had been successful in the long run, especially in Asia.21 The induced innovation approach to agrarian growth suggests that a growing population, instead of restraining economic growth, can induce a shift towards capital-saving and labour-intensive agrarian technologies, increasing the productivity of land.22 Consistent with these predictions, land yield increased enormously in the modern world, and especially in densely populated regions in Asia. Until recently, most statistical work relating population growth with economic growth found the rate of population growth to have a weak effect on, and population density to be positively related to, economic growth. Indeed, some studies have found that low density and high land–labour ratio can inhibit growth, possibly by making landowners indifferent to investment. Despite this evidence, interest in population has revived in development scholarship owing to new evidence from household surveys in developing countries, which show that larger families contribute to the persistence of mass poverty. Large family size makes poorer families less able to save for the education of their children. High birth rate can be a ‘demographic burden’ and exert a negative effect on economic growth by increasing the proportion of children and reducing the proportion of workers in the population, and by diverting resources towards consumption rather than saving and investment.23 Not surprisingly, economic history displays some ambivalence towards the nature of the role that resources play in long-term growth. A 1960s scholarship on the rise of East Asia placed emphasis on Boserupian response. Historical scholarship on the origins of East Asian economic growth observed a successful turn towards intensive agriculture, which played a role in sustaining industrialization.24 In explaining this turn, especially in Japan, attention fell on the ‘irrigation ratio’, which raised land yield via better flood control, higher cropping intensity, and greater crop choice. Investment in agriculture, sometimes done by the governments, was a crucial precondition for such growth. These lessons cannot be easily generalized beyond East Asia and the rice economies. Choices available to the peasantry in rice-growing Japan in the nineteenth century were not identical with the choices available to the peasantry in milletgrowing Deccan or Sub-Saharan Africa. There is nothing inevitable about the Boserupian expectation that agrarian societies facing diminishing returns will find a way out of the impasse. Many societies living in the arid tropical zones of the world have failed to find a solution to extreme scarcity of good soil and lack of a steady and plentiful supply of water. introduction 13 Neither diminishing returns nor the avoidance of the prospect is an inevitable outcome of population growth. Their presence or absence needs to be explained. Some of these ingredients have been used to construct a narrative of South Asian economic history in modern times. COMPETING NARRATIVES ON INDIA India (and Pakistan and Bangladesh) is a relatively new nation in the world. Notions of its past continue to be influenced by the memory of anti-colonial struggle and nationalist heritage. Not surprisingly, therefore, the idea that colonialism impoverished a region that had been wealthy and dynamic before British rule remains prevalent in popular and academic history alike. The proposition drew strength from several intellectual traditions. The oldest of these formed in reaction to imperialist historiography. The more recent one developed as an offshoot of the neo-Marxist theory of imperialism. Writings sympathetic to the British colonial empire had stressed the modernizing impact of colonial rule, which owed to political stability, good governance, and the transfer of knowledge and technology.25 These views suggested that pre-colonial India had been mired in political chaos and social stagnation. Potentials for economic growth were created in the nineteenth century, but India, being trapped in a pre-capitalist culture, was unable to utilize these opportunities. Colonialism weakened these obstacles and ushered in real capitalism. As we have seen, Marx, along with many writers of his time, believed in this possibility. The imperialist assessment came in for two kinds of criticism. First, an Indian nationalist account, articulated in the early twentieth century, stressed the unequal distribution of the positive benefits of the empire between the rulers and the subjects.26 Colonialism, in this view, aided a transfer of the social surplus in the shape of forced extraction of resources, called ‘drain’ in British India. Second, maritime and regional history from the 1950s showed that in the eighteenth century the subcontinent was a major commercial hub in the contemporary world, thus questioning the imperialist presumption that pre-colonial India had been trapped in pre-capitalist stagnation. A radical reassessment of Indian culture, and the role that cultural institutions played in business history, came to be offered at the same time (see Box 1.2). In the third quarter of the twentieth century a larger picture of colonial India was advanced, now framing India within a neo-Marxist story of world inequality and the genesis of underdevelopment. This picture retained the neo-classical emphasis on the emergence of a new international division of labour in the nineteenth century. During the first globalization, the region experienced a decline in industry and an expansion in agriculture, for India did not have enough capital and skilled labour needed for factory industrialization; but there was sufficient unutilized land and unskilled labour to enable an expansion of cultivation. The resultant specialization pattern contributed to world inequality, by making the tropics exporting primary products dependent on activities that promised slow growth in income at best. The neo-Marxist approach laid a large emphasis on colonialism to this picture of market-led specialization.27 It was colonialism that sustained the trade, investment, and specialization pattern. Unlike the nationalist account, where the link between colonialism and underdevelopment was mediated by state-engineered resource 14 economic history of india Box 1.2 Indian Society and the Economic History of India Karl Marx and other nineteenth century writers considered that the social structure that characterized India, divided into castes and communities, had strengthened despotic rulers and weakened private enterprise. Based on an interpretation of Hinduism, the German sociologist Max Weber saw Indian culture to be anti-entrepreneurial. By removing these endogenous obstacles to capitalism colonial rule and globalization had a beneficial or ‘modernizing’ effect upon India. Since then, scholars have shown that the hierarchy and diversity, which these writers thought were intrinsic to Indian society, were in fact quite fluid, and did not impinge on enterprise in quite so negative a way. Business relations did not necessarily form out of social ties, but often out of shared professional interests. The flourishing early modern trade from India showed how caste and community could be a positive resource for business, by making it possible for merchants, bankers, and artisans to share risk or information. And yet, it would be rash to dismiss the negative assessment of caste and community. One recent literature, associated with the work of Avner Greif, draws attention to the principle on which cooperative communities formed. Greif suggests that ‘interest-based, self-governed, non-kin-based organizations’ played a major role in the modernization of Europe. This literature does not use India. But if this theory is correct, then India, where professional groups usually developed around kinship and marriage, should show how societies fail to generate endogenous growth. If we look closely at Indian history, there is evidence that caste and community did not pose an insurmountable barrier to innovative behaviour; but there is also support for the view that caste and community could pose barriers to exchange of information between professionals who would gain by collaborating. While not restraining growth, such barriers slowed down technological change. Within economic theory, there is a renewed emphasis on group identity. One strand suggests that caste-like groups, which make conformity to norm a positive moral value and any breach of norm a sin, can suppress individual enterprise. Another strand makes the case that ethnic diversity tends to weaken the impetus to spend on public goods, such as education. In one model, developed in the context of a democratic setup, this outcome follows from assuming that the utility derived by one group from public goods depends negatively upon the utility that others derive. Indian history, which supplies examples of both conformity and low expenditure on public goods, deserves to be investigated in the light of these ideas. Readings: M.D. Morris, ‘Values as an Obstacle to Economic Growth in South Asia: An Historical Survey’, JEH, 27(4), 1967, pp. 588–607; Tirthankar Roy, Company of Kinsmen: Enterprise and Community in South Asian History 1700–1940, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2010; Avner Greif, Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006; Alberto Alesina, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, ‘Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1999, pp. 1243–84. transfer or drain, in these writings the link was mediated by class relations. Surplus extraction and transfer through market exchange needed local agents like landlords, headmen, and moneylenders, shaping an exploitative class structure. The resultant story is succinctly stated by a leading contributor to the literature: The destruction of handicrafts ... led to the deindustrialization of many third world economies in the nineteenth century … Most of the population released in this process had to find an alternative introduction 15 means of livelihood in agriculture … The phenomenon of de-industrialization was associated with the penetration of railway networks into the third world countries. [By encouraging crop exports] the railway revolution .. turned the third world economies inside out and enormously increased the intensity of dominion of advanced capitalist countries over them. The accompanying stress on cultivation of exportable cash crops, on the vendibility of land as an asset, and on prompt payment of obligations to the state, landlords and moneylenders in cash, enormously increased the economic power of the landlord, the trader and the moneylender upon the primary producer....28 The process began from de-industrialization, was distorted by new forms of market power, and held in place by colonial power. This paradigm, which drew resources from the neo-Marxist dependency approach as well as home-grown nationalism, and which I have elsewhere called ‘left nationalist’, suffered a credibility shock after the economic liberalization of India in the more recent years. If the colonists’ choice of economic liberalism had made India poor in the first place, why should a return to market liberalism produce robust economic growth today? Even before this turn some of the main testable propositions of the paradigm were questioned. For example, ‘drain’ had never been easy to interpret, let alone measure. It was predicted by the neo-Marxist approach that India would specialize in primary goods exports. In fact colonial India experienced impressive industrialization, marking it out as one of the strongest emerging economies of the nineteenth century. The proposition that India suffered de-industrialization is doubtful. There is evidence to show that the destruction of the handicrafts was a partial one, and the surviving handicrafts gained from globalization (Chapter 6). Chapter 4 shows that class power as an explanation for rural distress runs into many problems of definition. Another difficulty with narratives that place too much weight upon the capacity of the colonial state to do bad things (in neo-Marxist stories) or good things (in imperialist stories) is that, by any quantitative benchmark, such as per capita revenue generation, or the share of government income in national income, the British Indian state would appear to have been a very small state compared with those in Western Europe, or Russia and Japan. It was not as large and powerful as historians have often imagined it to be, possibly influenced by the illusion of greatness that the rulers of India built around themselves. It did not have the financial capacity to sustain an interventionist and intrusive set of policies. Out of this scepticism about state-centred narratives there have emerged a few other proposals on the sources of economic growth in colonial India. Morris D. Morris proposes that the nationalists had exaggerated the capacity of the colonial rulers to inflict damage. In fact the capacity of the regime to effect substantial changes was quite limited because of weak public finances and its ‘night-watchman’ stance, which saw the state as provider of security rather than an agent in development.29 B.R. Tomlinson has argued that the nineteenth century markets brought substantial gains for the peasantry. However, the end of the first globalization and hardening of autarky in the interwar world ended these gains.30 I have proposed that on average agriculture in colonial India did not produce enough surplus value for either the capitalists or the state. Poor soil, scarcity of water, and high capital cost, restricted prospects of irrigation with private means, gave rise to very low land yield, and made diminishing returns likely as population growth accelerated. Poverty and underdevelopment derived not from deindustrialization, but from the absence of an 16 economic history of india agricultural revolution sustainable by private savings.31 These revisionist stories have three advantages. First, they broaden the scope of comparative history by adding new variables—state capacity, markets, resources, and institutions. Second, they rightly question the fixation with the colonial state that the imperialists, nationalists, and neo-Marxists all share alike. A signal limitation of a colonialismcentred narrative is that it makes it difficult to compare India with, say, China, which was poor but not colonized. The alternatives do not suffer from that problem. Third, the alternatives are better able to link the past with the present. If indeed colonialism was responsible for Indian poverty, the end of colonialism should have seen a rapid decline in poverty in South Asia. Since that effect did not follow, surely there were other variables at work keeping many Indians poor? Both champions of the left-nationalist approach, and its critics, share one common weakness. They are all mainly interested in finding out why India remained poor after two centuries of capitalist transformation under colonial rule. Is this a good question to ask? Is it possible at all to categorize Indian economic experience so simply as either growth or impoverishment? BEYOND COMPETING NARRATIVES Both world historians and historians of India have too long employed their intellectual resources to show how India illustrates why the non-West stayed poor even as the West grew rich. The historian inspired by such questions usually begins with abstract models of ‘the rise of the Western world’, and looks towards India, China, or Africa, in order to find evidence to show that the conditions that worked for the West were missing in the non- West. They want to show that the non-Western world failed to ‘rise’ because it was different from Europe in some crucial respects. The present-day institutionists read this failure in terms of institutional weaknesses. The left nationalists read it in terms of politically induced underdevelopment. The Weberians see the failure in terms of the weakness of the enlightenment values of individualism and rationality. But all fundamentally offer a story of failure for India, China, or Africa. It goes without saying that using any of these regions to illustrate its failure does not help us understand the region well, and risks homogenizing the quite diverse experiences amongst the non-Western world into stylized opposites of the West. A world region as complex and large as India cannot easily fit any theoretical model at all. Colonial and post-colonial India was hardly an example of a failure. Frustrating the pessimists of classical, neo-Marxist or Weberian varieties, colonial India retained a flourishing entrepreneurial culture, which had obvious pre-colonial roots. Frustrating the institutional pessimist, colonial and pre-colonial India had strong property rights, a clearly enunciated notion of a rule of law, efficient business communities, a literate elite, and the bureaucratic tradition upon which a stable democratic state could be built later. A moment’s thought will also show that amidst such achievements, the region remains home to the world’s largest pool of poverty and illiteracy as well. Commerce, colonialism, and culture, in other words, enabled growth in some contexts, restrained growth in others, and sometimes even led to a regression. Economic history must acknowledge these variations. One obvious source of variation was the pattern of inequality and diversity that had been there before colonialism. The eighteenth century economy of the subcontinent was introduction 17 already a very uneven one. On the one hand, there were present a rich indigenous commercial tradition; territorial states that respected private property in land and trade because their own sustenance depended on the peasants and the merchants; a large literate elite running the fiscal administration; and rich cities that were home to highly skilled craftsmen. But the wealthy rulers, traders, and artisans were confined to the riparian, deltaic, and seaboard territories. Much of peninsular India consisted of dry lands, poor peasants, few roads, slow traffic, few towns, forests, waterless uplands, and uninhabited deserts. Transportation in these parts was unsafe and hugely labour intensive, artisanal production was of little value, and the political actors were unstable, predatory, and fiscally weak. Agricultural land in these zones produced average yields that were abysmal by European standards, stagnant in the long run as far as one can measure, and subject to violent fluctuations. In turn, the poor quality of the soil, extreme scarcity of water, few opportunities for long-distance trade in grain, and the pervasive risk of failed seasons, depressed potential investment in land, and might have strengthened the tendency to invest in precautionary savings, private mercenary armies, or gold and silver, for example. With such divergent initial conditions, globalization and colonialism could only produce divergent outcomes. There were significant gains. The superstructure of artisans, merchants, and elites played a vital role in the passage of empires. The literate elite supplied the manpower needed by the new empire, and thus softened the transition to colonial rule. Merchants and bankers forged successful partnerships with European capitalists and the colonial state, made money in new commodity trades, and reinvested their profits into factories. Peasants underlined the fiscal and political stability of the regime. The artisanal tradition survived an initial shock to eventually supply labour and capital to small-scale industry. But almost all of these gains were restricted to a few industries, a few cities, and a few districts endowed by water, good land, and market access. The average picture was one of a countryside that produced too little of value before and during colonialism, and a dissipation of some of the gains made in the pre-war times in the interwar period. What lessons do these diversities and differentiations suggest to us? Debates in world history are undoubtedly useful in making sense of India. But we also need to maintain a distance from such debates, and treat India as a case in itself, for India was a region characterized by a unique set of initial conditions that came in contact with global and external forces of change. What were these initial conditions? In order to answer the question, Chapter 2 surveys economic trends during 150 years of transition, a time when colonialism and the first globalization consolidated their roots. NOTES 1. For general accounts of the emergence of colonial rule in South Asia, see C.A. Bayly (ed.), An Illustrated History of Modern India 1600–1947, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990, section II; David Ludden, India and South Asia: A Short History, Oxford: Oneworld, 2002, chapter 3; Ayesha Jalal and Sugata Bose, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy, London and New York: Routledge, 2004. 2. On ‘globalization’ in the context of economic history, see M.D. Bordo, A.M. Taylor, and J.G. Williamson (eds), Globalization in Historical Perspective, Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 1–3. 3. Raymond W. Goldsmith, The Financial Development of India, Japan and the United States, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983, pp. 4–5. 18 economic history of india 4. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, in Edwin Cannan (ed.), New York: Modern Library, 1937, chapters I–III. Also recommended are John Hicks, A Theory of Economic History, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969; and Hla Myint, ‘The “Classical Theory” of International Trade and the Underdeveloped Countries’, Economic Journal, 68, 1958, pp. 317–37. 5. Robert E. Lucas, ‘Some Macroeconomics for the Twenty-first Century’, Lectures on Economic Growth, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002, pp. 97–108. 6. For an application, see Kevin O’Rourke and J.G. Williamson, Globalization and History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth-century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999. 7. Paul Krugman and A.J. Venables, ‘Globalization and the Inequality of Nations’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 1995, pp. 857–80. 8. See J. Toye and R. Toye, ‘The Origins and Interpretations of the Prebisch–Singer Thesis’, History of Political Economy, 35(3), 2003, pp. 437–67; Colin Clark, Conditions of Economic Progress, London: Macmillan, 1940. 9. These regions, the ‘staple theory’ tells us, used their primary source of comparative advantage to invest in and develop complementary forms of enterprise. Melville H. Watkins, ‘Staple Theory of Economic Growth’, Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, 29(2), 1963, pp. 141–58. 10. Douglass C. North, ‘Economic Performance through Time’, American Economic Review, 84(3), 1994, pp. 59–68; and Douglass C. North and R.P. Thomas, The Rise of the Western World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973, chapter 1. 11. North, ‘Economic Performance’, p. 361. 12. Avner Greif, Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006, chapter 12, pp. 379–405. 13. Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, ‘The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation’, American Economic Review, 91(5), 2001, pp. 1369–401; R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, ‘The Quality of Government’, The Journal of Law, Economics & Organization, 15(1), 1999, pp. 222–79; Kenneth L. Sokoloff and Stanley L. Engerman, ‘History Lessons: Institutions, Factors Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World’, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3), 2000, pp. 217–32. 14. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 874. 15. See Keith Griffin and John Gurley, ‘Radical Analyses of Imperialism, the Third World, and the Transition to Socialism: A Survey Article’, Journal of Economic Literature, 23(3), 1985, pp. 1089–143. 16. Warren Bill, ‘Imperialism and Capitalist Industrialisation’, New Left Review, 81, 1973, pp. 3–44. 17. The economic history counterpart of the argument can be found in Walt Rostow, ‘The Beginnings of Modern Growth in Europe: An Essay in Synthesis’, Journal of Economic History (JEH), 33(3), 1973, pp. 547–80. 18. Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1974. 19. A group of writers on African development contend that tropical climate and poor access to seaports explain the pattern of development in Africa better than institutional deficiencies. See, for example, Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, ‘Sources of Slow Growth in African Economies’, Journal of African Economies, 6(3), 1997, pp. 335–76. 20. Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983. 21. Ester Boserup, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change under Population Pressure, Chicago: Aldine, 1965. 22. Yujiro Hayami and V.W. Ruttan, Agriculture in Economic Development, Baltimore: University of Maryland Press, 1971. 23. To extend the link further, high death rates tend to reduce savings and growth, because many workers do not expect to live long and save for the future. Low death rates and high life expectancy raise savings and growth, because workers are induced to save for their retirement. These results together imply that a low population growth regime with birth and death rates both relatively high is likely to generate poor economic growth; but a low population growth regime with birth and death rates both relatively low is likely to generate high economic growth. Therefore, any simple crosssection correlation between population growth rate and economic growth rate turns out to be weak. Based on such result, the demographic impact on economic growth was underestimated in development scholarship until recently. There is now a richer understanding of why such poor correlations occur. 24. Shigeru Ishikawa, Economic development in Asian Perspective, Tokyo: Kinokuniya, 1967/1974. introduction 19 25. Perhaps the most important academic text illustrating the neo-imperialist view is Vera Anstey, Economic Development of India, Third Edition, London: Longman Green, 1939. 26. The classic statement of the nationalist position is R.C. Dutt, The Economic History of India in the Victorian Age, London: Kegan Paul, 1906. 27. For general restatements, see Sumit Sarkar, ‘The Colonial Economy’, Modern India: 1885–1947, Delhi: Macmillan, 1983; and A.K. Bagchi, The Political Economy of Underdevelopment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982, sections 4.3–4.5. 28. Bagchi, Political Economy, p. 34. 29. Morris D. Morris, ‘Towards a Reinterpretation of Nineteenth Century Indian Economic History’, JEH, 23(4), 1968, pp. 606–18. 30. B.R. Tomlinson, ‘The Historical Roots of Indian Poverty: Issues in the Economic and Social History of Modern South Asia: 1880–1960’, Modern Asian Studies (MAS), 22(1), 1988, pp. 123–40. 31. Tirthankar Roy, ‘A Delayed Revolution: Environment and Agrarian Change in India’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23(2), 2007, pp. 239–50; ‘Agrarian Crisis in Interwar India: Retrieving a Narrative’, EPW, 41(52), 2007, pp. 5389–400; and ‘Economic History and Modern India: Redefining the Link’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(3), 2002, pp. 109– 
